Commandant (CG -INV)  
U.S. Coast Guard 
Washington, DC 20593 
U.S. Coast Gua rd Marine 
Investigations: 
Causal A nalysis Procedures 
Version  2.0 
DCN:   MPS-P R-INV-05(21) 
November 2023 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page ii 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 Record Of Changes  
Approving Authority/Owner  
Captain Eve lynn Samms 
Commandant (CG -INV)  Document Author  
Commandant (CG- INV-1) 
Version  Description of Changes from Previous Version  Approval Date  
1.0 Initial version of this Procedures Manual  30 SEP 2022  
2.0 •Inserted new subsection 3.1 , Scope of Analysis for the
Different Investigative Levels of Effort.  Renumbered ol d
subsections 3.1 through 3.8 as 3.2 through 3.9.
•Updated section 2.3.6 to c orrect reference  for SHEL Model03 NOV  2023  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page iii 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 Table of Contents  
 
Section  Page  
1. Preface  1-1 
1.1. Purpose  1-1 
1.2. Organization of this Procedures Manual  1-1 
1.3. Intended Audience  1-1 
2. Fundamental Principles of Causal Analysis (Underlying Foundation)  2-1 
2.1. Fundamental Principles  2-1 
2.2. How Systems Operate  2-1 
2.2.1.  Model of Production  2-1 
2.2.2.  The First Element:  Organizations and Decision Makers  2-1 
2.2.3.  The Second Element:  Workplaces and Line Managers  2-2 
2.2.4.  The Third Element:  Preconditions  2-2 
2.2.5.  The Fourth Element:  Production and Line Workers  2-3 
2.2.6.  The Fifth Element:  Defenses  2-3 
2.2.7.  The System as a Whole  2-3 
2.3. How Systems Fail  2-4 
2.3.1.  Introduction:  Threats, Defenses, and Negative Outcomes  2-4 
2.3.2.  Active Faillures  and Latent Unsafe Conditions  2-4 
2.3.2.1.  Active Failures  2-5 
2.3.2.2.  Latent Unsafe Conditions (LUCs)  2-5 
2.3.3.  Causes of Systems Accidents:  “Swiss Cheese Diagram”  2-5 
2.3.4.  Organization Factors  2-6 
2.3.5.  Workplace Factors  2-7 
2.3.6.  Preconditions  2-8 
2.3.7.  Productions Factors  2-9 
2.3.8.  Defense Factors  2-9 
3. Analyzing Caus e 3-1 
3.1 Scope of Analysis for the Different Investigative Levels of Effort  3-1 
3.1.1.  Scope of Analysis for Standard Level Investigations  3-1 
3.1.2.  Scope of Analysis for Enhanced Level Investigations  3-1 
3.1.3.  Scope of Analysis for Formal Level Investigations  3-1 
3.2. Identifying the Initiating Event  3-1 
3.3. Identifying the Subsequent Events and Failed Defenses that Allowed them 
to Occur  3-2 
3.4. Identifying the Production Factors  3-2 
3.5. Identifying the Preconditions  3-3 
3.6. Identifying the Defense Factors that would Prevent the Initiating Event 
from Occurring  3-3 
3.7. Identifying the Workplace Factors and Failed Defenses  3-3 
3.8. Identifying the Organization Factors and Failed Defenses  3-4 
3.9. What do I do with the results of Causal Analysis  3-4 
4. [Reserved]  4-1 
  
APPENDIX   
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page iv  
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  Section  Page  
A-1 Analyzing Cause – Part 1:  Identify the Initiating Event, Subsequent Events & 
Failed Defenses  A-1 
A.1.1. Flow Chart  A-1 
A.1.2.  Worksheet  A-1 
A-2 Analyzing Cause – Part 2:  Identify Production, Unsafe Acts/Decisions, 
Preconditions & Failed Defenses  A-4 
A.2.1.  Flow Chart  A-4 
A.2.2.  Worksheet  A-4 
A-3 Analyzing Cause – Part 3:  Identify Workplace and Organizations Factors & 
Failed Defenses  A-6 
A.3.1.  Flow Chart  A-6 
A.3.2.  Worksheet  A-6 
A-4 Analyzing Cause – Examples of Completed Worksheets  A-8 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 1- 1 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 1.0  1. Preface 
1.1 Purpose  
This Procedures Manual  provides  Investigating O fficers  (IOs), members of Marine Boards, and 
other personnel involved in formal marine investigations, with  procedures, instructions, and 
guidance on performing causal analysis. 
1.2 Organization of this Procedures Manual  
This Procedures Manual  is divided into four  sections  including this Preface  (Section 1).  
Section 2 provides  background information on how a systematic way to view how systems 
operate and fail based primarily on the work of Dr. Reasons as adopted by the International 
Maritime Organization  (IMO) for the investigation of marine casualties and incidents . 
Section 3  provides guidance and procedures for analysis the facts and circumstances of a marine 
casualty in order to identify, classify, and describe the causal factors that resulted in a marine incident or casualty . 
Section 4 – [Reserved] ( future location on other methodologies/processes for analyzing for 
cause ) 
1.3 Intended Audience  
This document has been developed for Commandant, District Commanders, Officer’s in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), members of Marine Boards of Investigation, IOs  and other  personnel  
at Sectors, Marine Safety Units, Marine Safety Detachments, Districts, Are as, and Headquarters  
whose responsibilities involve  conducting and reviewing marine casualty investigations. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 2-1 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 2. Fundamental Principles of Causal Analysis (Underlying Foundation)  
2.1 Fundamental Principles  
Marine investigators shall keep the following fundamental principles in mind when 
explaining how a specific accident occurred:  
 
Principle #1 : Shipping, diving, oil exploration, fishing, towing, fuel transfers, passenger 
operations, and recreational boating are complex production systems.  These production systems do not create new cars or refrigerators; instead they produce intangibles such as safe passenger voyages, timely delivery of oil, and so on.  Because maritime transportation is a production system, it shares the elements common to every complex production system. 
Principle #2:  All accidents (including the most minor) are failures of the system , not simply 
the human or equipment directly involved. 
Principle #3 : No human error is entirely to blame.  Human error is a naturally occurring, 
intrinsic part of human performance.  While holding mariners accountable for their actions and taking steps to reduce human errors, marine investigators should bear Principle #2 firmly in mind.  The human error could not have resulted in an accident unless conditions in the system (especially the system’s defenses) allowed it.  
Principle #4 : System accidents have their primary origins in the fallible decisions made by 
the high-level corporate, regulatory, or plant  managers.  These fallible decisions are an 
inevitable part of the decision -making process, and the process of improving systems 
involves making fallible decisions harmless as opposed to eliminating high- level error.  
Principle #5:  The whole point of conducting an investigation and of analyzing the causes of 
an incident is to improve the system and prevent reoccurrence.  Accordingly, the marine investigator’s job is to identify system failures and propose fixes (recommendations). 
2.2 How Systems Operate 
2.2.1 Model of Production 
Many psychologists view all organized human or technological systems as production systems.  These production systems make energy, a chemical substance, a mechanism, or the mass transportation of any commodity (including people) by road, rail, sea, or air.   In this view the many maritime operations, once thought independent, are products of the maritime transportation system.  In this system, there are many factors that include charts and publications, aids to navigation, V essel Traffic S ystems  (VTS), laws and regulations, safety 
inspections, navigation equipment as well as all the other systems on vessels, including mariners who stand the watch.  When these factors come together in precise synchronization, the product is the safe and timely transit, fuel transfer, or use of our nation’s waterways.  As a complex production system, the maritime transportation system can be described in terms of the five elements of the model of production.  Additionally, the maritime transportation system is further described by various factors that reside within each of the five elements.  
2.2.2 The First Element:  Organizations and Decision Makers  
In order for a system to operate, it must have an initial direction.  At the organizational level, decision makers respond to the pressures, demands, and opportunities in the outside world 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 2 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  and set the goals for the system.  They also direct, at a strategic level, the ways in which the 
system will reach these goals.  In practice, decision makers take limited financial and other resources (equipment, people, talent, expertise, and time), and direct how they will be spent in order to get the most productivity with the highest degree of safety (a process of balance).  In the simplest of terms, decision makers provide the money to begin an operation, and an 
empty facility (or vessel) which, when properly equipped and staffed, will become an 
operating facility.  The Organization element is where the goals are set and a means to reach 
them is provided. 
Decision Makers  are the high level architects and managers of the system.   They set the 
rules and objectives for the system.  In the maritime transportation system, decision makers 
include lawmakers and regulators, underwriters and cargo lines, corporate CEOs and owner -
operator fishers.  
2.2.3 The Second Element:  Workplaces and Line Managers  
Below the decision makers are the line managers.  They must create specific plans to carry out operations, including the hiring of personnel, the training of personnel, the purchase and deployment of the right type of equipment, systems for managing ongoing operations, and finally, a means for reacting to all the foreseeable problems that arise.  Again, in simple terms, line managers take the money and empty facility, provided by the decision maker, and transform it into a facility filled with managers, workers and equipment.  The Workplace element is where personnel, buildings, equipment, and vessels have operations that are managed.  Generally speaking, the Workplace is where production occurs  
Line Managers  are the specialists who take the strategies outlined for them by decision 
makers and translate them into concrete activities.  In large companies, line managers have specialized areas of authority and operation, and are known as the facility manager or departmental titles such as operations, training, sales, and so on.  In the maritime transportation system, with regard to larger vessels, line managers may be the master and his/her officers.  In a small operation, such as an owner -operator small passenger vessel, the 
licensed operator may be the line manager, in addition to the decision maker.  
2.2.4 The Third Element:  Preconditions  
Although the line managers and decision makers have provided a system, that system cannot be considered ready to operate until both the workers and the equipment they use are properly prepared.  To be ready, the system must possess certain attributes:  
• Reliable equipment of the right kind;  
• A skilled and knowledgeable  workforce;  
• Appropriate attitudes and motivation;   
• Proper work schedules, supply delivery schedules, and maintenance programs,  
• Proper conditions allowing safe and efficient operations;  
• Procedures that give clear guidance about how the job is to be done; and  
• Clear understandings of what undesirable job performance is.  
• Suitable environment (internal and/or external)  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 3 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  The Precondition element contains the conditions that make people and machinery ready to 
go to work 
2.2.5 The Fourth Element:  Production and Line Workers  
Once the system is properly manned, equipped, and managed, a product can be created.  
Production is the precise synchronization of human and mechanical activities (actions or decisions) to produce the right product at the right time.  The Production element contains the actual operation of the system. (e.g. safe/timely voyages, fuel transfer, etc.)  
Line Workers  are the professional and recreational mariners (and shore -side maritime 
workers) who perform the tasks using many types of machinery in order to get the job done.  In the maritime transportation system, line workers are licensed mariners, unlicensed crew, dock workers, VTS personnel, etc.  
2.2.6 The Fifth Element:  Defenses  
In any system there are natural and man -made hazards.  Where they can reasonably be 
foreseen, the system should have safeguards, called Defenses, which protect people and equipment from injury, damage, or production- damaging losses.  Defenses may be human 
(procedural), such as a buddy system or plotting fixes; or mechanical, such as machinery guards or life jackets; or a combination of both.  Defensive systems perform the following functions:  
• Create awareness of local hazards and how they might be encountered;  
• Convey an understanding of how, when, and why hazards occur in the workplace;  
• Provide means (devices and systems) for detecting the presence of hazards;  
• Warn people and systems that some hazard is imminent;  
• Protect potential victims by separating them from the hazard; 
• Allow people/ system to recover from some “off -normal” or hazardous condition;  
• Contain/ limit the spread of a  hazard, or limit the number of victims affected; 
• Provide escape from a  hazard; and  
• Rescue injured/ threatened individuals from a situation in which negative 
outcomes have already occurred.  
2.2.7 The System as a Whol e 
The five elements in the model of production relate in very specific ways.  This relationship can be represented as below.  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 2-4 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  
2.3 How Systems Fail 
2.3.1 Introduction:  Threats, Defenses, and Negative Outcomes 
In general terms, production systems contain defenses against foreseeable threats.  
Accidents, which can loosely be defined as the occurrence of a negative outcome (event), happen when there are holes in the system’s defenses through which a threat penetrates. 
 
2.3.2 Active Failures and Latent Unsafe Conditions  
A system’s defenses can be penetrated for one of two reasons: 
(1) the system’s defenses are present but do not work properly for some reason; or 
(2) the system’s defenses are missing or entirely misma tched to the threat they face.  
These defense penetrations illustrate an important aspect of system failures:  they can be 
active failures and/or they can be latent unsafe conditions .  Active failures and latent unsafe 
conditions do not arise only in the defenses.  The threats that penetrate defenses originate within the system itself.  They are the active failures and latent unsafe conditions originating in each of the five elements of production.  Incident  Threats  
Defenses  Accident  Threats  
Defenses  
  

U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 2-5 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 2.3.2.1 Active Failures  
Active Failures  are unsafe acts and decisions committed in the presence of a hazard 
(condition).  Generally speaking, we are the most interested in active failures 
committed by line workers during operations (i.e., in the production and defense elements of the system).  Unsafe acts and decisions are human errors.  Most often, active failures have an immediate impact on safety.  The following are examples of active failures:  
• “Began a turn into the channel (the action) with an inaccurate mental picture of the vessel’s location (hazard).” 
• “Decided not to evacuate the pumproom (the decision) despite the presence of toxic gas (hazard).” 
Active failures described as an action taken or decision made can be found in the actions list of the timeline in the Findings of Fact in a MISLE Incident Investigation . 
2.3.2.2 Laten t Unsafe Conditions (LUCs)  
Latent Unsafe Conditions  (LUCs) are hazardous conditions in the system that lie 
dormant, often for years, only becoming evident when they combine with an unsafe act or decision to become an active failure resulting in a negative outcome (event).  Often they arise from decisions made far from the accident scene and, at the time, were believed to be good or necessary.  LUCs should describe the condition of the system arising  from a fallible decision or action, rather than the decision or action 
itself.  For instance: 
• “Fatigued,” rather than “decided to stay up late watching movies despite early watch.”  
• “Worn,” rather than “not properly maintained” or “not replaced on schedule.” 
• “Inadequate design,” rather than “mistakes during design.” 
LUCs can be found in the conditions list of the timeline in the Findings of Fact in a MISLE Incident Investigation. 
2.3.3 Causes of Systems Accidents:  “Swiss Cheese Diagram”  
The active failures and LUCs in the maritime transportation system all exist for a specific period of time, and they can be thought of as holes in the elements of production (“the cheese”) that appear at a given time and disappear at another time (when the LUC disappears).  Because LUCs continuously appear and disappear, they will not, in most cases, align.  For this reason, accidents do not constantly occur in complex systems despite the many active failures and LUCs that may be present.  When all the holes align at the same time, a threat may progress all the way through the elements of production and become an accident.  As the active failures and LUCs are represented as threats passing through the holes, a system accident can be visualized as in the below “Swiss Cheese Diagram”.  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 6 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0   
2.3.4 Organizational Factors  
Just as decision makers set the stage for production at the organizational level with 
appropriate decisions, they also set the stage for an accident  through inappropriate or fallible 
decisions.  In deciding how to use their limited resources, decision makers face difficult 
choices, and the system does not help them.  Money spent on improving the system’s 
productivity (i.e. making the extra run, carrying the extra cargo) has a relatively clear 
outcome:  higher profit.  Money spent on safety or environmental protection has relatively 
distant and long- term outcomes.  Decision makers occasionally inappropriately weigh the 
system’s feedback and make bad decisions.  These fallible decisions create LUCs in the 
system.   Examples of poor decisions include a lack of regulation, poorly planned 
government deregulation, and too rapid expansion of routes or services.  These decisions 
create LUCs that act on line managers.   The following Organizational Factors commonly 
occur in system accidents:  
• Human Resources  
o Staffing/manning (number or qualifications)  
o Training  
o Promotion/demotion  
o Employee benefits  
• Monetary/Budget Resources  
o Budgeting Process  
o Funds  
• Material Resources (equipment, facilities, etc.)  
o Material suitability  
o Lack of material  
• Organizational Climate  
o Organizational Structure   

U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 7 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  o Chain of command  
o Delegation of authority 
o Communications  
o Operational Culture  
o Norms and rules  
o Values and beliefs  
o Morale  
• Organizational Process  
o Operations and Internal Oversight  
o Operational tempo  
o Time pressures  
o Production quotas  
o Incentives  
o Measurements/appraisals  
o Schedules  
o Planning 
o Risk management  
o Safety management  
o Procedures  
o Objectives  
o Policies  
• External Oversight  
o Regulations and Laws  
o Industry Standards  
o Direct and Third Party Oversight  
o Enforcement  
o Safety promotion 
o Resources  
2.3.5 Workplace Factors  
The consequences of the Organizational Factors manifest themselves differently in the 
Workplace element of production.  If a line manager is competent, motivated, adequately funded, properly staffed, and has adequate time, they can transform a bad decision from above into a less -risky or even safe activity.  However, a less competent or poorly supplied 
line manager can make a bad decision worse, or execute a good decision in such a manner that it has bad effects.  The decisions and actions of line managers in implementing the decisions of those above them in the system can create additional LUCs.  Examples of line management creating latent unsafe (pre)conditions include inadequate procedures for doing the job, poor scheduling, insufficient training for line workers, and an inadequate maintenance regime.   The following Workplace Factors commonly occur in system 
accidents:  
• Human Resources  
o Staffing/manning (number or qualifications)  
o Training  
• Monetary/Budget Resources  
o Budgeting process  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 8 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  o Funds  
• Material Resources (equipment, facilities, etc.)  
o Material suitability  
o Lack of material  
• Organizational Structure  
o Chain of command  
o Delegation of authority 
o Communications  
• Operational Culture  
o Norms and rules  
o Values and beliefs  
o Morale  
• Operations and Supervision 
o Operational tempo  
o Time pressures  
o Production quotas  
o Incentives  
o Measurements/appraisals  
o Schedules  
o Planning 
o Risk management  
o Safety management  
o Objectives  
• Practices and Procedures  
o Human resource  
o Monetary/budget resource  
o Material resource  
o Organizational structure  
o Operational culture  
o Operations and supervision 
2.3.6 Preconditions  
Preconditions are the LUCs of the line workers and equipment itself.  Some LUCs in 
workplace management can render workers and equipment unready.  For instance, an 
inadequate training program could manifest itself in a variety of LUCs: excessive workload, 
undue time pressure, and motivation problems, creating ways in which workers would not be ready to go work.  The reverse relationship is also true:  a single LUC (gear or people not ready to work) could be created by several workplace factors.  Examples of latent unsafe (pre)conditions include:  improper gear, inexperience or untrained personnel, fatigue, equipment that is worn or unsuited to its use, navigation hazards, etc.  There are many 
factors known to degrade the performance of human beings.  Section 5 of MCI -02, Fact 
Finding and Evidence Handling Procedures , describes these factors in detail as they pertain 
to the use of the SHEL model and generating the timeline.  In short, LUCs related to line workers fall into one of the following general categories:  
• Limitations of persons  
o Physical conditions  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 2-9 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 o Psychological conditions 
o Psychosocial conditions 
o Physiological conditions 
• Person Mismatches  
o With policy/procedures 
(liveware- software)  
o With equipment/gear (liveware- hardware)  
o With the environment (liveware-environment) 
o With other person(s) (liveware- liveware)  
2.3.7 Production Factors 
Production Factors are the active failures that occur during an operation or as a part of the operation that result from one or more of the preceding LUCs and lead to the initiating event.  Experienced marine investigators will often encounter situations in which a person’s precondition, such as fatigue, appears to have caused a casualty, yet the same person successfully accomplished the same task the day before (or the hour before) with the same precondition.  What was different about the task at the time of the accident?  The answer lies in the relationship between preconditions and active failures.  It is almost impossible to 
predict exactly when, where, and how a given precondition will manifest itself into an active failure.  It is difficult to say when  a fatigued person will make a bad decision; all that can be 
said with certainty is that given enough opportunities (decisions), one decision will eventually be bad because of the fatigue.  Examples of Production Factor active failures include: 
• omission of steps in a task, 
• use of the wrong procedures, 
• violations of law or regulation, and 
• bad decisions in the presence of a hazard  
2.3.8 Defense Factors  
Few Production Factor active failures result in actual damage or injury, even when the system is relatively undefended.  For instance, in a grounding scenario a pilot’s decision to initiate a turn too early (an active failure) does not in itself cause an unwanted outcome.  Instead, the active failure must be left undetected and uncorrected in order to progress into the grounding.  In other words, the system’s defenses against a grounding are missing or inadequate.  Examples of Defense Factor LUCs include disabled warning systems, absence of monitoring (or plotting of fixes), and un-enforced regulations.  Defense Factor LUCs commonly found in system accidents include: 
• Defenses that were present but inadequate  
o Supervision/oversight 
o Policies/procedures  
o Engineered defenses  
o Briefings  
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 2- 10 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  o Training  
o Credentials/qualification requirements  
o Personal protective equipment  
o Defensive equipment  
o Information about actual/potential hazards  
• Defenses that were present but deliberately disabled  
o Policies/procedures  
o Engineered defenses deactivated  
o Training requirements  
o Briefing requirements  
o Credentials/qualifications requirements  
• Defenses that were never present or once present but now removed  
o Supervision/oversight  
o Policies/procedures  
o Engineered defenses  
o Briefings  
o Training  
o Credentials/qualifications requirements  
o Personal protective equipment  
o Information about actual/potential hazards  
• Defenses that do not exist or are unreasonable  
o Technology or systems do not exist  
o Technology or systems not reasonable for use  
 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 3-1 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 3. Analyzing Cause  
3.1 Scope of Analysis for the Different Investigative Levels of Effort  
The extent  to which an IO is able to  analyze the cause of any accident or casualty is dependent 
upon the amount of information that has been obtained and the extent to which that information 
covers the various elements of production.  The type and amount of information that has been 
obtained, in turn, is dependent upon the investigative level of effort and amount of resources that 
are used in the conduct of the investigation.  As a result, the scope of causal analysis for an 
investigation conducted at the Standard level of effort cannot realistically be expected to be as 
broad-reaching and detailed as that carried out for one conducted at the Enhanced or Formal 
level of effort.  To that end, the Coast Guard has established the following parameters for the 
scope of causal analysis that should be followed based on the level of effort undertaken for a 
marine casualty investigation . 
3.1.1 Scope of Analysis for Standard Level Investigations 
Identify initiating  event and subsequent events.  Focus on at least one obvious, readily 
apparent , or most probable active failure, immediate condition , or signif icant  failure in 
defenses  that was the primary causal factor for the initiating event.   Additional, contributing 
factors, if also obvious and readily apparent, may also be considered.  
3.1.2 Scope of Analysis for Enhanced Level Investigations 
Identify initiating and subsequent events.  Focus and thoroughly analyze all possible causal 
factors at the production, precondition, and defense factor areas, including between 
initiating and subsequent events.  Be alert for indications of and consider significant causal 
factors at the workplace and organizational levels.  
3.1.3 Scope of Analysis for Formal Level Investigations 
Identifying initiating and subsequent events.  Focus and thoroughly analyze all possible 
causal factors at all levels, including all failed/missing defenses between the initiating and 
subsequent events.  
 
3.2 Identifying the Initiating Event  
One of the most difficult aspects of any investigation is identifying the aspects of an accident you 
are trying to explain.  For the purposes of analyzing the causes of an accident, marine investigators must carefully identify the Initiating Event.  While a variety of actions, events, and conditions will precede an accident, a point must be chosen at which the accident is considered to start.  The marine investigator will initially focus on explaining how the accident began, and will then turn to explaining how it progressed.  For the purposes of analyzing the causes of an accident, the Initiating Event is simply the first unwanted or negative outcome in the timeline In marine casualties the Initiating Event may not be the first “reportable” event.  In many cases, the reportable event follows the Initiating Event and (when explained) sheds more light on the causes of the accident.  See the flowchart titled, “Part 1: Identify the Initiating Event, Subsequent Events, & Failed Defenses,” i n section A -1 of the Appendix. 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 3- 2 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  3.3 Identifying the Subsequent Events and Failed Defenses that Allowed them to Occur  
After identifying the I nitiating Event.  The next step is to identify the Subsequent Events, which 
are the unwanted events that originate from and follow the initiating event.  Next, to explain how 
the accident progressed from the Initiating Event into all the subsequent events, the marine investigator must identify the defensive failures that connect one event into another.  These are 
the defenses on a vessel or platform arising AFTER the Initiating Event (i.e. given the Initiating 
Event occurred, what defenses would have prevented the next Subsequent Event; and so on).  
See the flowchart titled, “Part 1: Identify the Initiating Event, Subsequent Events, & Failed Defenses,” in section  A-1 of the Appendix. 
 
3.4 Identifying the Production Factors  
In the simplest sense, production is the maritime operation that was being conducted at the time of the accident.  Once the marine investigator has identified the Initiating Event, he or she should ask what operation was being conducted at the time and just previous.  The next common sense question is which people (liveware) were conducting the operation in order to determine what actions were taken or decisions made.  In any accident, a person will have made one or many unsafe acts or decisions, either by mistake or sometimes willfully as det ermined by human error 
analysis .  The marine investigator shall identify all unsafe acts and decisions that occurred during 
production.  They must be careful not to confuse production activities (such as navigating) with defensive activities (such as plotting fixes).  As a rule of thumb, active failures in production have an immediate and recognizable effect on safety.  When it becomes difficult to make a determination as to whether an action or decision is ‘unsafe,’ the Substitution Test may be performed.  This is merely asking a professional (or several professionals) of similar grade and experience what they would do in the same situation, and to make a determination of whether the act or decision is unsafe (and why).  
While analyzing the information discovered during fact -finding, marine investigators may 
discover several production active failures (as well as several preconditions, LUCs in the workplace or organization).  While each is worthy of attention because they must be eliminated, not all of them necessarily connect to the accident at hand.  Marine investigators shall identify  

U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page 3-3 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 those active failures and LUCs with causal connection to the accident.  Other active failures 
(particularly willful violations) and LUCs may also be noted (and should be if severe enough).  See the flowchart titled , “Part 2: Identify Production, Unsafe Acts/Decisions, Preconditions, & 
Failed Defenses,” in section  A-2 of the Appendix. 
3.5 Identifying the Preconditions  
Once the marine investigator has identified the active failures in production, they must ask “In what condition did the person (Liveware), Software, Hardware, and/or Environment (SHEL) have to be for them/it to fail?”  Preconditions create the potential for a wide variety of active failures.  Marine investigators should again remember that they may encounter a large number of latent unsafe (pre)conditions.  For instance, a given mariner may have had LUCs of fatigue, drug use, and an aggressive attitude.  In this case, it may be difficult to ascertain exactly which precondition has a causal connection to the production active failure.  Marine investigators should record all preconditions internal to a person as having a causal connection.  Similarly, they may be tempted to “weigh” a given precondition over another (i.e., fatigue was more important than drug use or attitude).  Marine investigators should not give opinions as to the relative strength of various preconditions in their causal connection to a given production active failure without significant scientific basis for those opinions.  See the flowchart titled, “Part 2: Identify Production, Unsafe Acts/Decisions, Preconditions, & Failed Defenses,” in section A -2 of 
the Appendix. 
3.6 Identify ing the Defense Factors that would Prevent the Initiating Event from 
Occurring  
Once the marine investigator has completed the previous steps, they have identified the active 
failures in production that occurred.  Such active failures occur constantly in complex systems.  However, relatively few result in accidents.  When a system’s defenses were sufficient to detect an active failure and prevent the accident, a “near miss” is said to have occurred (though “near hit” may be a more appropriate term).  In order to explain an accident, marine investigators must identify the defense factor failures that allowed the active failure to progress into an accident.  Many faults may be discovered in the system’s defenses, only some of which will be causally connected to the production active failures and the accident.  Failed defenses should eventually be identified for all elements of the Model of Production. 
NOTE:  Upon identifying viable failed defenses throughout the Model of Production, the next 
logical step is to conclude that they are necessary, and finally, recommend their implementation.  This displays how vital this step is throughout. 
3.7 Identify ing the Workplace Factors and Failed Defenses  
Once the preconditions have been identified, the marine investigator should focus on the management environment to determine how and why the preconditions were created.  Marine investigators should also be careful to consider the absence of management in addition to pro-active management.  Marine investigators are cautioned to remember that the line manager’s ability to manage is limited by their available resources.  For this reason, it is important to carefully recognize the causal connection of Organizational Factors when identifying Workplace 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 3- 4 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  Factors.  Upon determining the Workplace Factors, identify any failed defenses .  See the 
flowchart titled, “Part 3: Identify Workplace and Organization Factors & Failed Defenses,” in 
section A -3 of the Appendix. 
3.8 Identify ing the Organization Factors and Failed Defenses  
The basic idea underlying the causal analysis system (and the IMO documents upon which it is 
based) is that system accidents have their primary origins in fallible decisions made by designers 
and high- level decision makers.  Marine investigators, having identified workplace LUCs, should 
identify the conditions to which the line managers were responding.  Decision makers’ fallible 
decisions create LUCs that affect line managers.  Marine investigators should bear in mind that decision makers rarely have direct access to the consequences of their decisions, and may be almost entirely unaware of the LUCs they have created.  Upon determining the Organization Factors, identify any failed defenses.  See the flowchart titled, “Part 3: Identify Workplace and Organization Factors & Failed Defenses,” section  A-3 of the Appendix.  
3.9 What do I do with the results of Causal Analysis  
When properly completed, the analysis should lead to conclusions, and then, to Safety Recommendations.  If it doesn’t it will show potential gaps in the findings of fact that need to be addressed.  Causal analysis should give you the ability to state (regardless of where in the Model of Production) that there were various unsafe conditions (whether or not they were latent) and unsafe acts or decisions that directly led to the Initiating Event and Subsequent Events.  Upon identifying the unsafe conditions statements can be made about what could correct/mitigate them.  Defense Factors (whether failed or missing) is normally where correction/mitigation is focused.  Further analysis  of Production Factors  (e.g. Human Error Analysis) should be 
conducted on the unsafe acts or decisions prior to determining the bes t corrective/mitigating 
action.  
 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page 4- 1 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 1.0  4. [Reserved]  
 
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-1 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  A-1 Analyzing Cause –  Part 1:  Identify  the Initiating Event, Subsequent 
Events & Failed Defenses  
A.1.1. Flow Chart  
 
A.1.2. Worksheet ( beginning on the  next page)  
  
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-2 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0   
  

APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-3 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-4 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  A-2 Analyzing Cause –  Part 2:  Identify Production, Unsafe Ac ts/Decisions, 
Preconditions &  Failed Defenses 
A.2.1. Flow Chart  
 
A.2.2. Worksheet (on next page)  
  
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-5 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0    

APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-6 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0  A-3 Analyzing Cause –  Part 3:  Identify Workplace and Organization 
Factors & Failed Defenses  
A.3.1. Flow Chart  
 
A.3.2. Worksheet (on next page)  
  
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations  Page A-7 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0   
 
 
 
   

APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page A-8 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 A-4 Analyzing Cause – Examples of Completed Worksheets  
Part 1:  Identify the Initiating Event, Subsequent Events, & Failed Defenses Initiating  Event     ICHABOD hit mooring line  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Strong  
Material  
 
-Break - 
away  
design  
Subsequent Event #1     Pilot Station Destroyed  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Prior 
notice  
of the  
hazard: 
visible/ 
audible 
indicator  
 
-Required  
armor  
Subsequent Event #2     Diver Decapitated  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Auto  
“kill” 
switch  
when  
the  
wheel is  
released  
Subsequent Event #3     ICHABOD lost control  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Same  
Auto “kill” 
switch  
previously  
mentioned
 
Subsequent Event #4     ICHABOD allided w/C/S  
 
  
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page A-9 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 Part 1a:  Identify the Initiating Event, Subsequent Events, & Failed Defenses (cont.)  Subsequent Event #4      ICHABOD allided w/C/S  Defense 
Factors  
 
Passenger  
Securing  
Device 
similar  
to  
seatbelts  
Subsequent Event #5     Passenger was thrown  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Prior 
notice  
of the  
hazard: 
visible/ 
audible 
indicator  
 
-Required  
armor  
Subsequent Event #     ____________________  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Auto  
“kill” 
switch  
when  
the  
wheel is  
released  
Subsequent Event #     _____________________  Defense 
Factors  
 
-Same  
Auto “kill” switch  
previously  
mentioned
 
Subsequent Event #     _____________________ 
 
 
   
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page A-10 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 Part 2: Identify Production, Unsafe Acts/Decisions, and Failed Defenses 
Preconditions  
 
- Weather  
 
- Cold 
Passenger  
 - Bow line  
location 
w/catenary  
 
- Visibility  
 - Possible drug 
influence  
 - Deaver was a 
new employee to the company
 Defense 
Factors  
 
-Procedures 
placing 
some sort  
of visible or audible 
marker on low 
handlines.  
Especially 
during 
period of reduced  Production  
Navigating 
 
Unsafe 
Acts or 
Decisions 
 
-Increased 
speed  
 
-Steer 
between  the 
pier and the 
mooring pin  Defense 
Factors  
 
Policy 
regarding 
speed 
during 
adverse 
visibility / weather 
conditions  
 
 
Initiating  Event    ICHABOD  hit mooring line  
 
 
 
            
APPENDIX 
U.S. Coast Guard Marine Investigations Page A- 11 
Causal Analysis Procedures  Version 2.0 Part 3:  Identify Workplace and Organization Factors and Failed Defenses  
Organization  
Factors  
(Decision Makers)  
 
CEO has old 
fashioned attitude with written policy  
 Defense 
Factors  
 
CG 
regulatory 
spot checks 
to ensure 
compliance 
on UPV companies  
 Workplace  
Factors  
(Line 
Managers)  
 
No written 
procedures 
on vessels 
 Defense 
Factors  
 
CG regulatory 
spot checks 
to ensure 
compliance 
on UPVs
 
 
 
 
 Completed during:  
Part 2                                      Part 1  Preconditions  
Defense Factors  
Production  
Defense Factors  
Initiating Event  
