 
 
 
 
PASSENGER VESSEL  YORKTOWN  LADY (O.N.  934041), PASSENGER  LOSS  OF 
LIFE IN THE CHESAPEAKE BAY NEAR YORKTOWN, VA ON Date of Incident  
 
EXECUTIVE  SUMMARY  
 
On date of incident , at 1330, the YORKTOWN LADY departed  Yorktown Marina in  Yorktown, 
VA, with ten passengers  and two crewmembers  consisting  of a master  and dive master.  At 1400, 
the vessel  arrived  at its routine dive location  located  approximately five nautical  miles  east of the 
marina in the Chesapeake Bay, set anchor and began preparing passengers for snorkeling 
activities.  At 1420, all ten passengers had entered the water for snorkeling, at which time the 
dive master departed his lookout position on the aft deck of the vessel and entered the lower cabin to prepare his lunch. Eight minutes later the dive master returned to the aft deck and noticed a snorkeler who appeared to be non-responsive. After advising the master, the dive master entered the water to assist the snorkeler.  He returned to the vessel with the unresponsive 
snorkeler and began emergency lifesaving actions on the aft deck of the vessel. The master 
notified the local Coast Guard unit and began gathering the other passengers back on board the YORKTOWN LADY.  
 
The unresponsive passenger was transferred to a Coast Guard small boat, taken to shore, and transported to a local  hospital via emergency  services.  The passenger  was pronounced dead  at the 
hospital upon arrival. 
 
Through its investigation, the Coast Guard determined the initiating event for this casualty was 
the snorkeler losing consciousness while in the water and subsequently drowning as a result. 
This led to the dive master  entering  the water  to render  assistance.  Causal  factors  contributing to 
this casualty include: (1) Failure of the dive master to follow company policy, (2) Inadequate 
company policy for snorkeling activities, (3) Failure of the master to effectively oversee crew  
activities,  (4) Poor health of the deceased passenger , (5) Inadequate m eans to observe aft- deck  
activities from the vessel wheelhouse , and (6) Lack of restrictions or warnings about dangers of 
snorkeling. 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN  Yorktown,  VA TRAINING  USE  ONLY  Investigating Officer  Course (MS -603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver. Mar 2024  
Commander  
United States  Coast  Guard 
Sector Yorktown  100 Hamilton  Drive  
Yorktown,  VA 23690 
Phone:  (757) 856-2464  
 
 
 
16732  
date of report  
 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS -603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  PAS
SENGER VESSEL  YORKTOWN  LADY (O.N.  934041), PASSENGER  LOSS  OF 
LIFE IN THE CHESAPEAKE BAY NEAR YORKTOWN, VA ON Date of Incident  
INVE
STIGATING  OFFICER’S  REPORT  
1.Preliminary  Statement
1.1. T
his marine casualty investigation was conducted and this report was submitted in
accordance with Title  46, Code of Federal  Regulations (CFR),  Subpart 4.07, and under the
authority of Title 46, United States Code (USC) Chapter 63.
1.2. The Investigating  Office  designated  the owner  of the YORKTOWN LADY,  as well as
the master and dive master of the YORKTOWN LADY, as parties -in-interest in this
investigation. No other individuals, organizations, or parties were designated a party- in- 
interest in accordance with 46 CFR Subsection 4.03-10.1.3. The Coast Guard was lead agency for all evidence collection activities involving this
investigation. Due to this investigation  involving a loss of life, the Coast  Guard  Investigative
Service (CGIS)  was notified  and agreed  to provide technical  assistance  as required. No other
persons or organizations assisted in this investigation.1.4. All times  listed  in this report are approximate, and in Eastern  Standard Time  using a 24-
hour format.
2.Vessels  Involved in the Incident
Official  Name:  YORKTOWN  LADY  
Identification  Number:  934041  
Flag:  United  States  
Vessel  Class/Type/Sub -Type  Passenger  ship/General/More  than 6 <100  GT 
Build  Year:  1984  
Gross  Tonnage:  69 GT 
Length:  63’ 
Commander  
United States  Coast  Guard 
Sector Yorktown  100 Hamilton  Drive  
Yorktown,  VA 23690 
Phone:  (757) 856-2464  
16732  
date of report  
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  
Beam/Width:  N/A 
Draft/Depth:  N/A 
Main/Primary  Propulsion:  
(Configuration/System Type, Ahead 
Horse Power)  Diesel  / Twin  Propeller  / 320 HP 
Owner/Operator:  Discovery  Incorporated 
Hampton, Virginia  
Figure 1: Photo of the YORKTOWN LADY taken by CG Investigator Day/Month/Year . 
3.Deceased,  Missing,  and/or Injured  Persons
Relationship  to Vessel  Sex Age Status  
Passenger (P-1) Male  52 Deceased  
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  4.Findings  of Fact
4.1. The Incident:
4.1.1.  On date of inc ident , at 1330, the YOR KT OWN LADY and  it s two-person crew 
consisti ng of a m aster and dive m aster departed the Yorktow n Marina  in Yorktow n, VA 
with ten passengers on a snorkeling excursi on. The excursion was to last 4 hours, and 
all as pects of  get ting  underway and anticipated activities t o occur wer e considered 
normal by the crew who had made si milar trips of this nature on numerous occasions 
before. 
4.1.2.  At 1400, the YORKTOWN LADY arrived at its routine dive and snorkeling 
location, approximately five nautical miles east of Yorktown Marina in the 
Chesapeake Bay.  After h el ping  set the  vessel’s an chor, t he master returned t o the  
wheelhouse to continue o perating  the vessel while the dive master began instructing 
a
nd assisting passengers with donning snorkeling gear. 
4.1.3.  At 1420, passengers began entering the water to start snorkeling. As each 
passenger entered t he  water, t he dive master annotated t heir na m e, address, and time 
entered water on a passenger log. By 1425, all passengers, to include Passenger 1 (P-1) 
who had entered the water at 1424, were engaged in snorkeling activities in the water 
off the aft deck of the vessel. 
4.1.4.  At 1430, the dive master departed his observation position on the aft deck of the 
YORKTOWN LADY and proceeded to the below deck cabin area, which contained the 
vessel’s restroom and food preparation/serving area. While the dive master spent 8 
minutes making a sandwich and heating coffee, the snorkeling passengers were not 
under observation b y any member of the crew. Additionally, the master who was in the 
wheelhouse during this time was unaware that the dive master had departed the aft 
deck. 
4.1.5.  At 1438, the dive master returned to the aft  deck and observed that P-1 appeared 
unconscious in the water and required assistance . After yelling to the master about 
P-1’s condition, the dive master entered the water to assist P-1. The dive master 
brought P- 1 back aboard the YOR KTOWN LADY and began CPR, but at no point was 
P-1 responsive to the rescue efforts occurring.
4.1.6.  At 1450, the ma ster contacted the Coast Guard to advise t hem of the situation, 
and then sounded the vessel’s horn three times to signal the other passengers that it 
was time to re-bo ard the vessel. At 1455, a Coast Guard small boat arrived on scene 
and transported P- 1 to aw aiting  Emergency M edical S ervice personnel and a local 
hospital. 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver. July
  2024 Training  Use Only  4.1.7.  At 1600, P-1 arrive d at Yorktown Hospital and was pronounced dea d. A 
medical autopsy determined cause of death to be from  drowni ng due to ingesti ng a 
large amount of water, and manner of death as accidental. 
4.1.8.  Both the master and dive master accomplished post- casualty drug and alcohol  
testing in accordance with 46 CFR Subpart 4.06. Both alcohol t est results were 
negative; however, one of the  drug tests was positive for the presence of cocaine. 
4.2. Addi
tional/Supporting Information:  
4.2.1.  The  YOR KTOWN LADY was a 63- foot inspected passenger vessel owned by 
Discovery Inc. and operated out of Yorktown Mar ina. The company utilized t he vessel 
to conduct SCUBA and snorkeling excursions in the Chesapeake Bay. The vessel’s 
C
ertificate of Inspecti on (COI) required one de ckhand and one master when carrying 
passengers for hire, and there were no previously reported marine casualties involving 
the vessel or  assigned crew. 
4.2.2.  During normal operations while passengers were in the water, it was common for 
the master to spend the majority of his time in the vessel wheelhouse keeping the vessel 
stable and acting as lookout for potential hazards and/or other vessels. Based on ve ssel 
c
onfiguration, it was nearly impossible for the master to see or observe passengers in 
the water o r to obs er ve the actions  of the dive master. A dditionally, there were no 
communications devices (such as hand-held r adios) be tween t he master and dive 
m
aster, nor were there video cameras/monitors on the vessel to observe various 
activities. 
4.2.3.  Discover y Inc. ha d a company policy regarding crewmember duti es during 
diving and snorkeling operations. The policy r equired t he dive master t o se rve as a 
saf
ety observer and either be in the water o r on the aft de ck of the vessel a t all times to 
maint
ain visual contact of passengers while they were e ngaged in snorkeling activities. 
Prior to this incident, it had become common practice of the dive master to leave 
snorkelers unattended for s hort time periods, and n ot to inform the master he was doi ng 
so. 
4.2.4.  For the past 5 years, the master worked aboard the YORKTOWN LADY for 
Discovery Inc., and held a required 100G T merchant mariners credential (MMC). The 
dive master worked aboard the vessel for the past 4 years, and had a n additional 6 
years dive master experience with another company before hiring on with Discovery 
Inc. 
4.2.5 The dive master was an active member of the Professional Association of Dive 
Instructors (PADI) and had maintained his PADI Open Water Diver certification for 
the past 10 years. The dive master had never held an MMC, nor did his duties require 
him to do so. 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  4.2.6. The observed weather conditions at the time of this incident were winds out of the 
east at 5- 7 knots, clear sunny skies, and waves from 1-2 feet . Air temperature was 
approximately 78 degrees, and water temperature was approximately 67 degrees. 
4.2.7. When P-1 boarded the YORKTOWN LADY, he was 56 years old and had no 
know n previous snorkeli ng experience. P - 1 was 5’ 10” tall, weighed 275 pounds , and 
ha
d a documented history of smoking and initial onset of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). 
4.2.8. An examination of the master’s work/rest history for 96-hours prior to the 
incident provide d no indication  of impa irment  or inability to perform assigned duties as 
require d. A wo rk/rest history for the dive master however, indicated he consumed 
alcohol and illegal drugs (See paragraph 4.1.8) until 0200 hours on date of incident 
followed by eight hours of sleep before reporting for duty. 
4.2.9. The snorkeling equipment used by passengers on date of incident was purchased 
new by Discover y Inc. a year ea rlier and had been inspected by the YORKTOWN 
LADY crew on at least a weekly basis, with the most recent  inspecti on being on the day 
of the inc
ident . All ins pections were logge d and indicated no deficiencies or material 
concerns. The equipment used by P-1 was examined and found to be in serviceable 
condition  with no ma te rial defects or  abnor malities. Sizes appe ar ed appr opriate for  the 
physical features of  P-1 and met the recommended use specifications by the 
manufacturer. 
5.Analysis
5.1. F
ailure of the dive master to follow company policy. The investigation determined the
dive master  intentionally  left the aft deck of the Yorktown Lady on day of incident , leaving the
snorkeling passengers in the water unattended. Company policy regarding diving and
snorkeling operations required dive masters to act as a safety observer either by being in thewater with snorkelers, or in a position on the vessel to maintain constant visual contact of allsnorkelers at  all times,  so as to render  aid or assistance if a snorkeler  required  it. By leaving  the
aft deck, the dive master left P -1 and the other nine snorkelers unattended for 8 minutes.
Although the dive master knew what the policy required, it had become a common practice ofhis to leave snorkelers unattended for various lengths of time. He reasoned that nothing badwould happen during the short periods he was gone, and since there had been no adverseconsequences from leaving snorkelers unattended in the past, it’s the most likely reason hecontinued the practice. The dive master never informed the master he was leaving snorkelersunattended, and there was no information discovered that the master ever knew these policyviolations were occurring. Had the dive master been watching the snorkelers as required, hemay have noticed P- 1 was in distress earlier and been able to render assistance.
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July  2024 Training  Use Only  5.2. Inadequate company policy for  snorkeling activities. Discovery Inc. company policy 
r
equired dive masters provide passengers with vessel embarking and disembarking 
instructions, along with instruction  on hand signals to use if  passengers believed they were in 
distress. Additionally, the policy required dive masters to act as a safety observer over 
snorkeling activities by ma intaining  visual cont act of passenger at all times by either being  in 
the water or on the aft deck of the vessel. Also, the policy required dive master be fully 
trained as a member of t h e vessel’s c rew. What the policy lacke d was guid ance to follow if 
the dive master was not able to maintain visual contact with snorkelers. Nor did the policy 
discuss possible situations where policy deviations might be necessar y. Further, there we re 
no details on how to accomplish these tasks, or evidence of any training to show the crew 
was trained on the policy. Discovery likely believed their policies were adequate because 
there had been no past accidents or passenger incidents that would drive the need for policy 
changes . It’s li kely that had the policy required dive masters to see k assistance fr om the 
master when having trouble keeping snorkelers observed, or required dive masters to actually 
be in the water with snorkelers, P- 1’s di stress m ay ha ve been not iced m uch earlier o r 
completely avoided. 
5.3. Failure of the master to effectively oversee c rew  activities. Although the dive master 
was t asked t o ove rsee and m anage passenger s norkeling  activities, i t was the  vessel m aster’s 
responsibility to ensure the dive master was accomplishing these tasks safely and effectively. 
Unbeknownst to the master, it had become common practice for the dive master to leave 
snorkelers unattended, and to not fully brief all passengers on safety a nd emergency 
pr
ocedures. Additionally, from his position in the wheelhouse where he spent t h e majority of 
his time aboard the ve ssel, the master was unable to see or hear passengers or  the dive master 
involved in snorkeling a ctivities. There was no indication  the master purposefully ignored t he 
dive master’s a ctivities, how ever t here was al so no  indi cation  the master ev er che cked on t he 
dive master ei ther—most likely because the master placed an inordinate le vel of trust on the 
dive master to accomplish his tasks, and because nothing adverse ever happened before as a 
result of the dive master’s activities. It would have been reasonable f or the master to devise a 
manner of keeping better track of vessel and personnel activities to ensure safety and 
accountability, and that following company policy in the workplace was a priority. Had the 
master t aken a more active supervisory role, he  may ha ve discovered t he dive master’s h abit 
of leaving passengers unattended, and he may have been able to take appropriate measures t o 
correct the problem and prevent this casualty from occurring because the snorkelers would 
have been in visual contact of the crew and they may have noticed when P- 1 wa s in d istress. 
5.4. Poor health of  the deceased p assenger (P -1). Although P- 1’s of ficial cau se of  deat h 
was determined to be drowning, post-mortem autopsy results indicated his overall poor 
health significantly contributed to his death. The autopsy report indicate d P-1 was 5 feet 10 
i
nches tall and weighed 275 pounds—placing him in the “obese” categor y with a body- m ass- 
index (BMI) of 39.5 a s measured by the United States Center  for Disease Control. The report 
also ide nt ified a hi story of smoking and a diagnosis of initial onset of COPD, which typically 
includes symptoms of shortness of breath. Because snorkeling required long periods of 
holding one’s breath when underwater while also actively swimming to maintain buoyancy, it 
is
 likely P-1 overexerted himself before ingesting sufficient water to lose consciousness. 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July  2024 Training  Use Only  This investigation did not attempt to determine if P-1’s overall physical condition and 
stamina were conducive to participate in such a strenuous activity as snorkeling. Nor could 
it be determined if he had ever participated in snorkeling activities  before or if he was aware 
of the physical exertion demands required. Additionally, P-1 made no outward 
remarks or 
indications to the vessel crew or other passengers that he might need assistance or extra 
accommodations to safely snorkel along with the other passengers. Had P-1  been better 
informed of how the strenuous activity of snorkeling affects the human body, he may have 
decided not to snorkel at all, or ask  the crew for assistance before entering the water. 
5.5. Inadequate means to observe aft-d eck activities from the vessel wheelhouse.  With 
only a crew of two on a 65-foot vessel, and one of those two required to stay in the 
wheelhouse during dive/snorkel activities, a prudent measure would be 
to have CCTV 
capability to see the aft deck an d passenger activity areas from the wheelhouse. Radios or an 
intercom system would also provide a means to communicate between the 
aft deck and 
wheelhouse to convey direction, warnings, etc., to enhance passenger operations. It was 
unclear why none of these capabilities were utilized, however the expense and maintenance 
of these systems is often prohibitive for smaller 
operators. In this case, if the master had 
noticed the dive master  not on the aft  deck, he may have taken measures to find out where he 
was.
 Conversely, if the dive master had told the master he needed a break, the master could 
have assumed passenger observation responsibilities over the CCTV.  Any of these measures 
may have reduced the amount of time passengers were unobserved i n the water  and lessened 
P-1’s time in the water while in distress.
5.6. Lack of restrictions  or warnings about dangers of snorkeling. While there is no law 
or regulation that required Discovery Inc. to warn 
its passengers on the inherent dangers of 
snorkeling and diving, it  is common practice amongst companies conducting this activity to 
have a warning statement that passengers sign or that is briefed before they make the 
decision to begin the activity. These warnings include the respiratory stress that snorkeling 
puts on people. If P-1 had been presented with this information, he may have made the 
decision to not snorkel or, once he began experiencing distress, he may have sought help 
earlier or returned to the vessel before he reached the point of unconsciousness. 
6.Conclusions
6.1. Determination  of Cause:
6.1.1. Th
e initiating  event  for this casualty  occurred  when  P-1 ingested  large  amounts 
of water and subsequently drowned. Causal factors leading to this event were: 
6.1.1.1.  The dive m aster left snorkeli ng passengers in the water unobserved for 
8 minutes. 
6.1.1.2.  Company policy did not require the dive master to notify the master if he 
could not or was having difficulty effectively observing snorkeling passengers in 
the w
ater.  
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS-603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July  2024 Training  Use Only  6.1.1.3.  The vessel m aster was un aware the dive master w as not  fol lowing  
company policy and leaving the snorkeling passengers unobserved. 
6.1.1.4.  P-1’s physiological conditions made snorkeling a potentially unsafe  
activity.  
6.1.1.5.  The vessel was unequipped with a means  for the cr ew to effectively 
communicate
 or observe passenger or other crewmember  activities. 
6.1.1.6.  No law or regulation provides standardized  guidance to vessel owners  
about warning passengers of the dangers of snor keling, nor about restricting 
high-risk individuals from snorkeling.  
6.1.2. I
n an effort to render assistance to P-1, the next event occurred  when the dive 
master  entered  the water,  placing  himself  at risk of harm  or injury. Factors  that may 
have prevented this event were:  
6.1.2.1.  Company policies required all vessel crew to initiate rescue e fforts 
when necessary. Because rescue efforts inherently involve a measure of risk, 
and there were no other reasonable methods to affect a timely rescue, this 
investigation determined rescue actions of the crew were appropriate given 
the circumstances involved. 
6.2. Evidence of Acts or Violations of Law by Any Coast Guard Credentialed Mariner  
S
ubject to Action Under 46 USC Chapter 77: The actions described in paragraphs 5.3 
and 6.1.1.3. above represent a potential allegati on of negl igence by the master of the 
YORKTOWN LADY. 
6.3. Evidence of Acts or V iolation  of L aw by U.S . Coast G uard Personnel, or any other 
pe
rson: There were no potential acts of misconduct, incompetence, negligence, 
unskillfulness, or violations of law by Coast Guard Employees that contributed to this 
casualty. 
6.4. Evidence of Acts Subject to Civil Penalty:  This investigation  did not identify any 
pot
ential violations of U.S. law warranting Coast Guard civil penalty actions. 
6.5. Evidence of Criminal Acts: CGIS reviewed the evidence in this investigation  and did 
not identify any potential vi olations  of cr iminal law . 
6.6. Need for New of Amended U.S. Law or Regulation: This investigation  identified no 
matters 
needing new or amended U.S. law or regulation. 
 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS -603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  6.7. Unsafe Actions or Conditions that were Not Causal Factors: 
6.7.1. A post-casualty drug test revealed the dive master had cocaine metabolites in his 
system. Further investigation revealed the dive master ingested cocaine 11 hours prior 
to reporting for work on the YORKTOWN LADY on day of incident . According to 
various studies, the immediate effects of cocaine such as euphoria, dilated eyes, 
excitability, etc., typically dissipate within an hour of use. However, the “come-down” 
period may last several hours depending on the amount and frequency of use. 
Common symptoms 
during the come-down period are lack of sleep, exhaustion, 
dehydration, irritability, and inability to concentrate. The master observed the dive 
master on several occasions throughout the day of the incident but observed none of 
the common symptom’s indicative of drug or alcohol use. Additionally, passengers 
asked to describe the appearance and behavior of the dive master reported no common 
signs or indicators of drug use as described above. Finally, the dive master stated he 
routinely departed the aft  deck once all passengers were in the water snorkeling. In 
consideration of the information above and all related evidence obtained during this 
investigation, it could not be concluded the dive master’s drug use the night before was 
somehow a contributing factor in this incident. 
7.Actions Taken Since the Incident
7.1 Discovery Inc. removed the dive master from all safety sensitive positions within the 
company and terminated his employment. Because the dive master never possessed nor 
applied for a Coast Guard-issued Merchant Mariner Credential, his use of dangerous drugs 
violated no federal law or regulation enforceable by the Coast Guard. 
7.2. On d ate of issuance, the Coast Guard Office of  Investigations and Casualty Analysis 
(CG-INV) issued  Safety Alert titled Maintaining a Watchful Eye on Passeng er in the Water, 
01-XX ind ustry wide recommending that companies wh o offer recreational diving  and 
snorkeling activities to the public review to ensure their crews understand  the impo rtance of 
maintaining 
constant observation of custo mers actively involved these activities and to render 
assistance 
to those experiencing difficulty or other adverse con ditions. 
7.3. On d ate of issuance, Sector Yor ktown Officer in C harge, Marine Inspection (OCMI) 
issued  a Finding of Con cern regarding encouraging  operators co nducting diving and  snorkeling 
operations to review their curr ent policies and procedures regarding crew oversight of  those 
activities. It emphasized how vague and  unclear policies can contribute to v arious unsafe 
actions and conditions that can jeop ardize passengers involved in str enuous water activities. 
United  States  Coast  Guard  
TRACEN Yorktown, VA  Investigating Officer Course (MS -603) 
Training  Aid 
Ver.
 July 2024 Training  Use Only  8.2. Administrative  Recommendations: 
8.2.1.  Recommend the Sector Yorktown OCMI initiate an investigation involving potential 
allegations identified in paragraph 6.2 above in accordance with 46 CFR Part 5.  
8.2.2. Recommend  this investigation  be closed.  
I.M. Investigator 
I.M. Investigator 
I
nvestigating Officer 
U.S
. Coast Guard8. Recommendations
8.1. Safety Recommendations: There were no proposed actions to add new or amend existing U.S. 
laws or regulations, international requirements, industry standards, or U.S. Coast Guard policies and 
procedures as part of this investigation.
