

Commander
United States Coast Guard
Sector Yorktown 
100 Hamilton Hall
Yorktown, VA 23690
Staff Symbol: (spi)  
Phone: (757) 856-2464 


16732
November XX, 20XX


COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VESSEL APPLESAUCE (O.N. 111111), CREWMEMBER INJURY AND LOSS OF LIFE ON THE YORK RIVER NEAR YORKTOWN, VA, ON SEPTEMBER 17, 2018


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


On September 17, 2018 at approximately 0830, a crewmember assigned to the inspected small passenger sailing vessel APPLESAUCE arrived for work to perform scheduled maintenance aboard the vessel while moored in its permanently assigned docking space at the Yorktown Marina in Yorktown, Virginia. The maintenance involved reattaching an electrical cable for a light on top of the main mast that came loose the day before approximately 30 feet above the deck.  There were no other vessel personnel present to assist with the cable repair; however, the crewmember’s girlfriend accompanied him, and she planned to sail with the vessel as a passenger later that day. With the crewmember wearing a safety harness attached to a safety rope, he climbed to the top of the main mast to reattach the electric cable.  Once in position, he instructed his girlfriend to tie the end of the rope to a section of the deck railing, which she did with a loose half-hitch knot.  At approximately 0900, the crewmember called for his girlfriend to slacken the rope so he could lower himself a few feet for better access to the cable.  As she loosened the rope on the railing, the crewmember unexpectedly shifted, causing the rope to tighten and the knot to come loose from the railing.  The girlfriend was unable to hold on to the rope and the crewmember fell approximately 30 feet to the deck of the APPLESAUCE and struck his head on the wooden surface.  The girlfriend immediately telephoned the vessel’s Captain for assistance, and the Captain called 911 for emergency assistance.
A helicopter flew the crewmember to a local hospital for treatment, but he died 7 days later from blunt force head trauma.  Emergency responders treated the girlfriend at the scene for rope burn and minor lacerations to her hands.
Through its investigation, the Coast Guard determined the initiating event to be the failure of the rope attached to the vessel railing.  With no other means to stop his descent, the crewmember suffered serious injury and subsequent death as he fell rapidly to the deck below.  Causal factors contributing to this casualty were:  failure of CM-1 to follow established company safety procedures, 2) failure of CM-1 to ensure the safety line was properly secured, 3) failure of CM-1 to inform the Captain of repair delays. 4) inadequate oversight by the company and Captains regarding visitor activities onboard Apple Boat vessels, 5) lack of safeguards to prevent serious injury during falls, 6) failure to have secondary means to break or slow the crewmember’s fall.


Commander
United States Coast Guard
Sector Yorktown
100 Hamilton Hall
Yorktown, VA 23690
Staff Symbol: (spi)  
Phone: (757) 856-2464 


16732
November 01, 2018


COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VESSEL APPLESAUCE (O.N. 111111), CREWMEMBER INJURY AND LOSS OF LIFE ON THE YORK RIVER NEAR YORKTOWN, VA, ON SEPTEMBER 17, 2018


INVESTIGATING OFFICER’S REPORT


1.   Preliminary Statement
This marine casualty investigation was conducted and this report was submitted in accordance with Title 46, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Subpart 4.07, and under the authority of Title 46, United States Code (USC) Chapter 63.
The Investigating Office designated the owner of the APPLESAUCE as a party-in-interest in this investigation.  No other individuals, organizations, or parties were designated a party-in-interest in accordance with 46 CFR Subsection 4.03-10.
The Coast Guard was the lead agency for all evidence collection activities involving this investigation.  The Virginia Marine Police assisted Coast Guard investigators with initial casualty scene response and contacting potential witnesses for interviews.  Due to this incident involving a loss of life, the Coast Guard Investigative Service (CGIS) was notified and agreed to provide technical assistance as required.  No other persons or organizations assisted in this investigation.
All times listed in this report are approximate, and in Eastern Standard Time using a 24-hour format, and are approximate.

Vessel Involved in the Incident
Official Name:
APPLESAUCE 
Identification Number:
1111111 – Official Number (US)
Flag: 
United States 
Vessel Class/Type/Sub-Type
Passenger Ship/Excursion/Tour Vessel/More than 6 Passengers
Build Year:
1978
Gross Tonnage:
66 GT
Length:
64.8 feet
Beam/Width:
10 feet
Draft/Depth:
8 feet
Main/Primary Propulsion: (Configuration/System Type,  Ahead Horse Power)
Diesel reduction/single screwed, 150 HP Auxiliary Sail
Owner:
Apple Boats Incorporated
Yorktown Virginia USA
Operator:
Apple Boats Incorporated
Yorktown Virginia USA



Figure 1. Photograph of APPLESAUCE underway taken July 4, 2018, provided by Apple Boats.
Deceased, Missing, and/or Injured Persons 
Relationship to Vessel
Sex
Age
Status
CM-1
Male
25
Deceased
Findings of Fact
The Incident:
On September 16, 2018, at 1600, the APPLESAUCE moored at the Yorktown Marina in Yorktown, VA after it completed a 4-hour sailing excursion with 10 passengers.  Just prior to arrival, both Captain and crew observed a large bird become entangled in the vessel sails causing an electrical cable to detach from the all-around white light mounted near the top of the main mast.   Once the vessel tied off at the marina and all passengers departed the dock area, the Captain directed Crewmember 1 (CM-1) to repair the detached cable prior to the next voyage scheduled for 1200 hours the following day.  Due to the late hour and approaching darkness, the Captain agreed with CM-1’s request to make the repair the following morning with the help of another crewmember (CM-2) who agreed to meet with CM-1 at 0830 hours.
On September 17, 2018, at 0830, CM-1 arrived at Yorktown Marina and began repairs aboard the APPLESAUCE.  His girlfriend accompanied him and planned to ride along on a sailing excursion later that day.  As CM-1 gathered tools and equipment, he received a call from CM-2 who said he would be delayed at least 2 hours because of an unforeseen family emergency.

Figure 2.  Half-hitch knot example from Internet
Figure 2.  Half-hitch knot example from InternetAt 0835, CM-1 decided to begin the repair work with the assistance of his girlfriend.  After donning a safety harness, he attached the harness to the end of a 5/8-inch nylon rope which extended up the main mast to a previously installed pulley then back down to the deck.  He then used the rope sail rigging to climb up the main mast as his girlfriend pulled on the rope to remove any slack.  Once atop the mast, he instructed his girlfriend to tie the end of the rope off on the vessel’s starboard railing, which she did using a half-hitch knot. 
At 0900, CM-1 asked his girlfriend to loosen slack on the rope so he could lower himself a few feet to attach the cable to the mast.  As his girlfriend gave slack, CM-1’s weight jerked the rope, and the knot came loose from the railing.  His girlfriend attempted to hold the rope with her hands but CM-1’s weight was too much for her strength and she lost her grip.  The rope slipped through her hands as CM-1 descended toward the deck.  With nothing to help him regain his balance or grab hold of on the mast, CM-1 fell approximately 30 feet landing head first on the wooden deck near the cockpit.  CM-1 was not wearing any protective head gear, nor was there any type of arresting apparatus or device present to slow or break his fall.
At 0903, after seeing CM-1was badly injured, his girlfriend immediately called the Captain on his office phone and requested assistance and the Captain called 911.  
At 0920, Yorktown emergency responders arrived and stabilized the unconscious CM-1 before transporting him to West End Hospital in Yorktown.  Emergency responders treated his girlfriend at the scene for minor rope burns and lacerations to both her hands, and required no further medical assistance.
At 0948, the Captain reported the incident to Coast Guard Sector Yorktown.
On September 24, 2018 at 1030, CM-1 was pronounced dead at Mother of Mercy Hospital in Norfolk, VA, where he had been transferred on September 18.  A coroner’s report issued on October 15, 2018 determined CM-1’s manner of death accidental, and cause of death as blunt-force head trauma.
Post-casualty drug and alcohol testing required by 46 CFR Subpart 4.06 was not conducted because of CM-1’s immediate hospitalization for his injuries.  However, a later review of CM-1’s medical treatment records during the first 32-hours of care revealed no indication of the presence of either illegal drugs or alcohol in his system.
Additional/Supporting Information:
Apple Boats Incorporated of Yorktown, VA, owned the APPLESAUCE, which was one of four auxiliary sailing vessels operated by the company.  Each vessel employed a crew of four personnel to provide sailing excursions with passengers along the York River and the surrounding areas of the Chesapeake Bay.  The APPLESAUCE was used in its current capacity and configuration since it was built in 1978, and there were no previously reported marine casualties involving the vessel or assigned crew.
Coast Guard Sector Yorktown last inspected the APPLESAUCE in March of 2018 with no safety deficiencies noted. 
When this incident occurred, there were no federal rules or regulations regarding safety requirements for working aloft on commercial sailing vessels.  However, in March of 2016, Apple Boats published an internal operating procedure for working at heights above 10 feet on all of its vessels.  Specifically, the procedure stated “only properly trained and authorized crew are allowed to work aloft at heights greater than 10 feet off of any surface or vessel deck.”  The procedure also required any crewmember conducting maintenance in the rigging to have another properly trained and authorized crewmember tending safety lines which were required to be secured to a permanent fixture on the deck.  No requirement for follow-on training beyond an initial training class existed, nor was there a requirement for vessel Captains or other company personnel to monitor or review crew activities conducted at heights greater than 10 feet.
CM-1 was hired as a deckhand aboard the APPLESAUCE in May 2014.  He did not hold a Coast Guard issued merchant mariner credential, nor was a credential required for his position.  In August of 2014, CM-1 completed a 3-hour sail rigging training class hosted by Apple Boats, which qualified him to perform tasks aboard company vessels at heights greater than 10 feet.
Over a five-day period in July 2018, the Captain of the APPLESAUCE (a licensed Master of vessels under 100 gross tons with an auxiliary sail endorsement) inspected all sails, masts, ropes/lines, and other associated sailing equipment used aboard the APPLESAUCE, and determined there were no deficiencies with any of the equipment.
A post-accident examination of the safety harness used by CM-1 found the harness was in good condition with no rips, tears or fraying.  All harness buckles and attachments were in good working order, and the rope was secured to the harness with a snap-hook.  The rope itself was in good condition with no obvious fraying or dry rot.  The pulley on the main mast (See para 4.1.3) had a hairline crack on the block housing but it did not interfere with the pulley’s overall operation.
The environmental weather conditions at the time and place of the incident were winds out of the east at 1-2 miles per hour, clear sunny skies, and calm waters.  Air temperature was approximately 68 degrees, and water temperature was approximately 65 degrees.
Visits by family and friends aboard Apple Boats while moored were a regular occurrence, and generally condoned by Apple Boat personnel and vessel Captains.  No laws, rules or policies prohibited this practice, and there were no known instances of a visitor having their safety jeopardized in any way.  The day of the incident was the first time CM-1’s girlfriend had been aboard the APPLESAUCE.

Analysis
Failure of CM-1 to follow established company safety procedures.  When this incident occurred, there were no federal rules or regulations regarding safety requirements for working aloft on commercial sailing vessels, however Apple Boats Incorporated had specific written policy regarding procedures for working at heights above 10 feet for all of its sailing vessels.  In part, the policy required a minimum of two qualified crewmembers for any work being conducted at heights over 10 feet.  The policy also required the wear of Underwriters Laboratory-approved safety harnesses secured to safety lines by a metal clip, and the safety lines secured to permanently fixed objects to prevent falls.  CM-1 was aware of the policy and qualified to work aloft since August 2014 and had done so safely on average of twice a week over the past 12-month period.  Though CM-1 was wearing the proper safety harness, the investigation could not determine why CM-1 chose not to wait for CM-2 to arrive and assist with the repairs.  Witnesses reported CM-1 was extremely comfortable and familiar with working aloft in the sail rigging of the APPLESAUCE and that he may have believed this was just another routine task that he could easily accomplish with only the help of his girlfriend observing from below.  Had he waited for CM-2 to assist with repairs, this casualty may have been avoided.
Failure of CM-1 to ensure the safety line was properly secured.  As mentioned in paragraph 5.1 above, company procedures required all safety lines be secured to fixed objects when working aloft to prevent ropes from slipping.  CM-1 properly secured his safety lines when working aloft on dozens of occasions in the past and was presumably fully aware of the need and requirement to do so.  However, the investigation could not determine why he failed to secure the line himself on this occasion or recognize that his girlfriend had not done so effectively.  Once he reached the top of the mast, he simply told his girlfriend to “tie off the end of the rope.”  He did not verify she had done so, nor did he take any other precautions such as tying an extra knot or loop in the safety line that may have caught in the pulley and stopped or slowed a potential fall or slip.  Had he taken any of these actions, he may have been able to stop or slow his fall thus preventing or lessening the severity of his injuries.
Failure of CM-1 to inform the Captain of repair delays. The APPLESAUCE Captain was unaware CM-2 had not reported for duty at 0830 hours, and that CM-1 was proceeding with the electrical cable repairs with only his girlfriend present on the vessel. Good work practice would have been for CM-1 to inform the Captain of the girlfriend’s presence and repair delays, but CM-1 most likely felt no urgency to do so because the Captain had established a high-level of trust with his crew and relied on their judgment as to whether a situation required he be informed. The Captain firmly stated he would not have approved the girlfriend helping CM-1 with the cable repair, and there was no evidence discovered to indicate otherwise. Had the Captain been more insistent about being informed of vessel activities, the repairs may have been delayed until another qualified crewmember could properly assist and this incident may have been avoided. 
Inadequate oversight by the company and Captains regarding visitor activities onboard Apple Boat vessels. The APPLESAUCE Captain was unaware CM-1’s girlfriend was visiting the vessel, and it was not unusual for friends and family members to accompany or visit Apple Boat vessel crewmembers while performing shipboard activities. No laws, rules or policies prohibited this practice, and there were no known instances of a visitor having their safety jeopardized in any way. Vessel Captains were aware of, and generally condoned the visits but they were not always present when visitors were aboard. However, the ability of friends and family to generally come and go at will aboard the vessel, and sometimes help with minor shipboard tasks, may have inadvertently created an impression among the crew that the Captain would be ok with their helping out with maintenance tasks.  Had there been more established practices outlining the authorized activities of shipboard visitors, CM-1 may have been more inclined to either wait for assistance or ask the Captain for help, rather than employ an untrained visitor to assist with repairs.  
Lack of safeguards to prevent serious injury during falls. Though CM-1 was not wearing any protective head gear (such as a hard hat or helmet) as mentioned in paragraph 4.1.4 above, there were no laws, regulations, policies, or industry standards requiring or recommending he do so while performing work aloft on the APPLESAUCE. While protective head gear may have mitigated the seriousness of the head injury sustained (provided it had not fallen off during the fall), hard hats commonly used aboard vessels are generally designed to protect the head from falling objects, not to prevent head injury during a fall by the wearer. A more practical safeguard to prevent falls from high places may have been the use of a safety net or apparatus strung between the masts to catch or slow someone or something’s fall, but again there were no laws, rules, policies, or industry standards requiring or recommending such a device. Also, the effectiveness of such a safeguard would be dependent on whether the safeguard was used properly, if at all. Another practical safeguard may have been for CM-1 to have tied an extra knot or loop in the safety line that may have caught in the pulley and stopped the fall before he struck the deck. Another option may have been to use climbing equipment that controlled the release rate of the rope as he descended. Even when the safety rope is tied off properly to a fixed object, such safeguards could serve as backup if the fixed object were to fail.
Conclusions
Determination of Cause:
The initiating event for this casualty occurred when the rope attached to the starboard railing came loose as CM-1 began his descent down the main mast. Causal factors leading to this event were:
CM-1 failed to follow Apple Boat policy requiring a minimum of two qualified crewmembers to be present for any work being conducted at heights over 10 feet.
CM-1 failed to secure his safety line to a fixed object to prevent the rope from slipping.
CM-1 failed to inform the Captain that CM-2 would be late for work and that he would be starting repairs without him.
Inadequate oversight by Apple Boats and Captains to stay informed of visitor and crew activities aboard vessels during the Captain’s absence.
The rope coming loose from the railing resulted in the next event, which was  CM-1 incurring serious, and ultimately fatal, head injuries as he impacted the wooden deck after falling nearly 30 feet.  Causal factors leading to this event were:
CM-1 was not wearing any protective head gear that may have mitigated the seriousness of his injuries.
There were no additional safeguards between CM-1 and the deck below to stop or slow his descent which may have mitigated the seriousness of his injuries.
Evidence of Act(s) or Violation(s) of Law by Any Coast Guard Credentialed Mariner Subject to Action Under 46 USC Chapter 77:  There were no potential acts of misconduct, incompetence, negligence, unskillfulness, or violations of law by a credentialed mariner identified as part of this investigation.  
Evidence of Act(s) or Violation(s) of Law by U.S. Coast Guard Personnel, or any other person:  There were no potential acts of misconduct, incompetence, negligence, unskillfulness, or violations of law by Coast Guard employees or any other person that contributed to this casualty.
Evidence of Act(s) Subject to Civil Penalty:  CM-1’s required post-casualty drug and alcohol testing was not completed as required by 46 CFR 4.06 due to CM-1’s injuries and immediate medical treatment despite attempts by the marine employer, therefore no civil penalty action for not completing the required drug and alcohol was recommended. There was no other evidence of potential civil penalty violations during the investigation. 
Evidence of Criminal Act(s):  CGIS reviewed the evidence in this investigation and did not identify any potential violations of criminal law.
Need for New or Amended U.S. Law or Regulation: This investigation identified no potential matters needing new or amended U.S. law or regulation.
Unsafe Actions or Conditions that Were Not Causal Factors. 


Figure 3.  Coast Guard Photograph of cracked main mast pulley taken September 18, 2018.

Figure 3.  Coast Guard Photograph of cracked main mast pulley taken September 18, 2018.
The main mast pulley attached to CM-1’s safety line had a hairline crack on the block housing.  Although the main mast pulley mentioned in paragraphs 4.1.3 and 4.2.5 above had a hairline crack which significantly weakened the pulleys holding ability, there was no evidence to indicate the crack contributed in any way to the rope coming loose or to CM-1’s injuries.  When examined, the pulley was still intact and had not failed even after CM-1’s fall.  However, the crack poses a danger to other crewmembers using the pulley and should be repaired or removed from service. 

Actions Taken Since the Incident
Between October 25 and 30, 2018, Marine Safety Representatives from Sector Yorktown hosted industry days at four lower Chesapeake Bay marinas used primarily by small passenger sailing vessels to promote safety aloft while working on sail rigging and associated parts. Discussions included use and inspections of safety lines and pulleys, along with best practices to follow when specific regulation and policy were absent.  Representatives from seven local passenger vessel companies attended along with numerous crewmembers of vessels moored at the marinas.
On October 30, 2018, Finding of Concern 01-18 was issued by CG-INV encouraging vessel owners to review procedures for overseeing and controlling the activities of crewmember families and friends while aboard commercial vessels.  The review should ensure Captains and crew are familiar with company visitation policies aboard vessels and in particular, the extent to which visitors can safely participate in shipboard activities, as well as appropriate visitation times and areas of vessels that would be off-limits to non-crew personnel.
Recommendations
Safety Recommendation:  There were no proposed actions to add new or amend existing U.S. laws or regulations, international requirements, industry standards, or U.S. Coast Guard policies and procedures as part of this investigation.
Administrative Recommendations:
Recommend no civil penalty action for the potential violation identified in paragraph 6.4 above.
Recommend this investigation be closed.



Signature if Investigating Officer
NAME OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER
Lieutenant, U.S. Coast Guard
Investigating Officer
